# Pied Piper and Mouse That Lays Golden Eggs Allegory

You are the Pied Piper wanting to catch the one mouse that lays golden eggs out of all the mice in town. This mouse looks like any other mouse. All the mice are known for dancing together in circles when they hear tunes. Instead of dancing in one large circle or in random circles the mice group up when dancing according to how they appreciate the tunes they hear. Mice that like the tune in a certain way dance together in a common group. Other mice might like the tune differently. So they dance together in their own group. The mice want the music to be as loud as possible. They all dance in full view right in front of you.

It just so happens that when you walk away from the mice while playing a tune only one dancing mouse group will follow you as they perform their circle dance. Due to an outside force that you know about but cannot explain the dancing mice group that follows you always includes that special mouse. All the other mice in the dancing groups not following you scamper away into their mice hideaways.

You can play many tunes to observe how many dancing mouse groups there are before you decide which tune to play when marching away. Later on, after marching away with what would be a smaller mouse population than when you started, you can repeat the process while testing out different tunes as many times as needed while observing the dancing mice groups. You know due to the unexplained force that every time you march away playing a tune the special mouse is amongst that one circle of dancing mice that follows you. You also know the unexplained force is limited. It works only six times in a row.

Would you decide on the one tune that has one mouse dancing by itself while all the other mice dance in one other large group? Or, would you decide on a tune that has many, many small groups of dancing mice? Remember, you do not know which mouse lays the golden eggs. You also do not know which dancing group will follow you. You do know the dancing group that does follow you as you march away playing a tune will contain the golden egg laying mouse. You want that group that follows you to be as small as possible until it contains one mouse. The dancing group that follows you has a better chance to contain fewer mice when the tune you play results in the largest number of evenly populated separate dancing groups.

When you repeat the mice dancing tune playing process, did playing the same notes make a difference? No, it did not,and in fact, you were not trying to guess the notes or the tune like how most people play Wordle for letters and words. Instead, you were noticing which tunes reduce the number of mice until there is one remaining. That is how you catch the mouse that lays golden eggs.
